# Tourism and Recreation

People value the ability to enjoy and use coastal areas for outdoors experiences. The ability to do so can be limited by lack of tourism infrastructure, contaminated waters at beaches, and lack of coastal access points. Accessing coastal areas for non extractive purposes is important to many people, including locals who build communities around beach usage, and tourists who generally aggregate near beaches. 

We include three measures of beach usage availability: number of jobs in the tourism sector, the number of days with beach closures from contaminants, and frequent access points along the coast. This goal scores highest when tourism is abundant and the ability to consistently access the coast is high. This goal is not about the revenue or livelihoods that are generated by tourism and recreation (that is captured in the livelihoods & economies goal) but instead captures the value that people have for experiencing and enjoying coastal areas. 

## Data Layers

The **number of jobs in the tourism sector** and the annual growth rate were derived from the National Ocean Economics Program data. We calculated annual job growth rates by comparing total employment from the tourism sector to the average number of jobs in this sector over the previous 3 years. The target for region job growth is set to be equal to or greater than the national average, calculated using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

The **beach closures** layer was derived from the EPA Beach Advisory and Closing Online Notification (BEACON) database. We use the number of days a beach is closed per year due to pathogens in the water as a proxy for the impact of pathogens in coastal waters. Data is provided at the beach level, aggregated to county and then again aggregated to the region level. Our reference point is 100 days free of closures, representing the average length of the swimming season for the region. 

Ideally we would also use the EPA BEACON Beach Days dataset which lists the number of beach days in each swimming season, as well as the number of days closed/opened. We could use the total number of beach days in each swimming season to better calibrate the reference point. But it is clear that the data for Beach Days in the BEACON dataset is not consistent year to year or beach to beach. Many of the beaches list 0 total beach days, which we feel is incorrect. But we can get a general estimate for number of beach days using the beach days dataset.
 
The **coastal access** layer was derived from the NOAA Environmental Sensitivity Index.  We used this database to identify spatial point data of biological and human use resources. This was used as a proxy for coastal access points. Our reference point is an access point every mile.

## Model

Each data layer is scored between 0 and 100 and then averaged with equal weighting by region to get the Tourism & Recreation score.

